.TH audiowaveform 1 "18 May 2022"

.SH NAME

audiowaveform \- generates and renders waveforms from audio files

.SH SYNOPSIS

.B audiowaveform [options]

.SH DESCRIPTION

.B audiowaveform
generates waveform data from either MP3, WAV, FLAC, Ogg Vorbis, or Opus format
audio files. Waveform data can be used to produce a visual rendering of the
audio, similar in appearance to audio editing applications.

Waveform data files are saved in either binary format (.dat) or JSON (.json).
Given an input waveform data file,
.B audiowaveform
can also render the audio waveform as a PNG image at a given time offset and
zoom level.

The waveform data is produced from an input audio signal by first combining the
input channels to produce a mono signal. The next stage is to compute the
minimum and maximum sample values over groups of
.I N
input samples (where
.I N
is controlled by either the
.B --zoom
or
.B --pixels-per-second
option), such that each
.I N
input samples produces one pair of minimum and maximum points in the output.

Refer to
.BR audiowaveform (5)
for details of the binary and JSON waveform data file formats.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP 4
.B --help
Show help message.

.TP
.B --version\fR, \fB-v\fR
Show version information.

.TP
.B --quiet\fR, \fB-q\fR
Disables status messages.

.TP
.B --input-filename\fR, \fB-i\fR <filename>
Input filename, which should be a MP3, WAV, FLAC, Ogg Vorbis, or Opus audio file,
or a binary waveform data file. By default, \fBaudiowaveform\fR uses the file
extension to decide how to read the input file (either .mp3, .wav, .flac, .ogg,
\&.oga, .opus, or .dat, as appropriate), but this can be overridden by the
\fB--input-format\fR option. If the \fB--input-filename\fR option is \fB-\fR or
is omitted, \fBaudiowaveform\fR reads from standard input, and the
\fB--input-format\fR option must be used to specify the data format.

Note that Opus support requires libsndfile 1.0.29 or later, so may not be
available on all systems.

.TP
.B --output-filename\fR, \fB-o\fR <filename>
Output filename, which may be either a WAV audio file, a binary or JSON format
waveform data file, or a PNG image file. By default, \fBaudiowaveform\fR
uses the file extension to decide the kind of output to generate
(either .wav, .dat, .json, or .png, as appropriate), but this can be overridden
by the \fB--output-format\fR option. If the \fB--output-filename\fR option is
\fB-\fR or is omitted, \fBaudiowaveform\fR writes to standard output, and the
\fB--output-format\fR option must be used to specify the data format.

.TP
.B --input-format\fR <format>
Input data format, either \fBwav\fR, \fBmp3\fR, \fBflac\fR, \fBogg\fR,
\fBopus\fR, or \fBdat\fR. This option must be used when reading from standard
input. It may also be used to set the input file format, instead of it being
determined from the file extension from the \fB--input-filename\fR option.

.TP
.B --output-format\fR <format>
Output data format, either \fBwav\fR, \fBdat\fR, \fBjson\fR, or \fBpng\fR. This
option must be used when writing to standard output. It may also be used to set
the output file format, instead of it being determined from the file extension
from the \fB--output-filename\fR option.

.TP
.B --zoom\fR, \fB-z\fR <zoom> (default: 256)
When creating a waveform data file or image, specifies the number of input
samples to use to generate each output waveform data point.
Note: this option cannot be used if either the \fB--pixels-per-second\fR or
\fB--end\fR option is specified. When creating a PNG image file, a value of
\fBauto\fR scales the waveform automatically to fit the image width.

.TP
.B --pixels-per-second\fR <zoom> (default: 100)
When creating a waveform data file or image, specifies the number of output
waveform data points to generate for each second of audio input.
Note: this option cannot be used if either the \fB--zoom\fR or \fB--end\fR
option is specified.

.TP
.B --bits\fR, \fB-b\fR <bits> (default: 16)
When creating a waveform data file, specifies the number of data bits to use for
output waveform data points. Valid values are either 8 or 16.

.TP
.B --split-channels
Output files are multi-channel, not combined into a single waveform.

.TP
.B --start\fR, \fB-s\fR <start> (default: 0)
When creating a waveform image, specifies the start time, in seconds.

.TP
.B --end\fR, \fB-e\fR <end> (default: 0)
When creating a waveform image, specifies the end time, in seconds.
Note: this option cannot be used if the \fB--zoom\fR option is specified.

.TP
.B --width\fR, \fB-w\fR <width> (default: 800)
When creating a waveform image, specifies the image width.

.TP
.B --height\fR, \fB-h\fR <height> (default: 250)
When creating a waveform image, specifies the image height.

.TP
.B --colors\fR, \fB-c\fR <colors> (default: audacity)
When creating a waveform image, specifies the color scheme to use. Valid values
are either \fBaudacity\fR, which generates a blue waveform on a grey background,
similar to Audacity, or \fBaudition\fR, which generates a green waveform on a
dark background, similar to Adobe Audition.

.TP
.B --border-color\fR <rrggbb[aa]>
When creating a waveform image, specifies the border color. If not given,
the default color used is controlled by the \fB--colors\fR option.

The color value should include two hexadecimal digits for each of red, green,
and blue (00 to FF), and optional alpha transparency (00 to FF).

.TP
.B --background-color\fR <rrggbb[aa]>
When creating a waveform image, specifies the background color. If not given,
the default color used is controlled by the \fB--colors\fR option.

.TP
.B --waveform-color\fR <rrggbb[aa]>
When creating a waveform image, specifies the waveform color. If not given,
the default color used is controlled by the \fB--colors\fR option.

.TP
.B --axis-label-color\fR <rrggbb[aa]>
When creating a waveform image, specifies the axis labels color. If not given,
the default color used is controlled by the \fB--colors\fR option.

.TP
.B --with-axis-labels\fR, \fB--no-axis-labels\fR (default: with axis labels)
When creating a waveform image, specifies whether to render axis labels and
image border.

.TP
.B --amplitude-scale\fR <scale> (default: 1)
When creating a waveform image or waveform data file, specifies an amplitude
scaling (or vertical zoom) to apply to the waveform. Must be either a number
or \fBauto\fR, which scales the waveform to the maximum height.

.TP
.B --waveform-style\fR <style> (default: normal)
When creating a waveform image, specifies how waveform is drawn. Valid values
are either \fBnormal\fR, which draws a normal waveform, or \fBbars\fR, which
draws the waveform as vertical bars.

.TP
.B --bar-width\fR <width> (default: 8)
When creating a waveform image with the \fB--waveform-style bars\fR option,
specifies the width of each bar, in pixels.

.TP
.B --bar-gap\fR <width> (default: 4)
When creating a waveform image with the \fB--waveform-style bars\fR option,
specifies the separation between each bar, in pixels.

.TP
.B --bar-style\fR <style> (default: square)
When creating a waveform image with the \fB--waveform-style bars\fR option,
specifies how each bar is drawn. Valid values are either \fBsquare\fR,
which draws the waveform bars with square corners, or \fBrounded\fR, which
draws the waveform with rounded corners.

.TP
.B --compression\fR <level> (default: -1)
When creating a waveform image, specifies the PNG compression level. Must be
either -1 (default compression) or between 0 (fastest) and 9 (best compression).

.SH EXAMPLES

Generate waveform data from an MP3 file, at 256 samples per point with 8-bit
resolution:

.in +4
.nf
.na
audiowaveform -i test.mp3 -o test.dat -z 256 -b 8
.ad
.fi
.in -4

Generate waveform data containing multiple channels, rather than
combining all channels into a single waveform:

.in +4
.nf
.na
audiowaveform -i test.mp3 -o test.dat -z 256 -b 8 --split-channels
.ad
.fi
.in -4

Generate waveform data in JSON format from a FLAC file, at 256 samples per point
with 8-bit resolution:

.in +4
.nf
.na
audiowaveform -i test.flac -o test.json -z 256 -b 8
.ad
.fi
.in -4

Generate a 1000x200 pixel PNG image from a waveform data file, at 512 samples
per pixel, starting at 5.0 seconds from the start of the audio:

.in +4
.nf
.na
audiowaveform -i test.dat -o test.png -z 512 -s 5.0 -w 1000 -h 200
.ad
.fi
.in -4

Generate a 1000x200 pixel PNG image from a waveform data file, starting at 5.0
seconds from the start of the audio, ending at 10.0 seconds:

.in +4
.nf
.na
audiowaveform -i test.dat -o test.png -s 5.0 -e 10.0 -w 1000 -h 200
.ad
.fi
.in -4

Generate a 1000x200 pixel PNG image from a waveform data file, at 200 pixels per
second, starting at 5.0 seconds from the start of the audio:

.in +4
.nf
.na
audiowaveform -i test.dat -o test.png --pixels-per-second 200 -s 5.0 -w 1000 -h 200
.ad
.fi
.in -4

Generate a 1000x200 PNG image directly from a WAV file, at 300 samples per
pixel, starting at 60.0 seconds from the start of the audio:

.in +4
.nf
.na
audiowaveform -i test.wav -o test.png -z 300 -s 60.0 -w 1000 -h 200
.ad
.fi
.in -4

Generate a 1000x200 PNG image from an MP3 file, showing the entire duration:

.in +4
.nf
.na
audiowaveform -i test.mp3 -o test.png -w 1000 -h 200 -z auto
.ad
.fi
.in -4

Generate a 1000x200 PNG image from an MP3 file, using a custom bar style:

.in +4
.nf
.na
audiowaveform -i test.mp3 -o test.png -w 1000 -h 200 -z auto --waveform-style bars --bar-width 10 --bar-gap 2
.ad
.fi
.in -4

Generate a waveform data file from standard input, to standard output, using
\fBffmpeg\fR to convert a video file to WAV format:

.in +4
.nf
.na
ffmpeg -i test.mp4 -f wav - | audiowaveform --input-format wav --output-format dat -b 8 > test.dat
.ad
.fi
.in -4

Note: If you want to render multiple images from the same audio file, it's
generally preferable to first create a waveform data (.dat) file, and create
the images from that, as decoding long MP3 files can take significant time.

Convert a waveform data file to JSON format:

.in +4
.nf
.na
audiowaveform -i test.dat -o test.json
.ad
.fi
.in -4

Convert MP3 to WAV format audio:

.in +4
.nf
.na
audiowaveform -i test.mp3 -o test.wav
.ad
.fi
.in -4

.SH LIMITATIONS

The
.B audiowaveform
program has the following limitations:

.IP \[bu] 2
When generating PNG images the maximum audio sample rate is 50,000 Hz.

.IP \[bu]
When generating PNG files, it is not valid to specify a zoom level smaller
than that used to generate the input waveform data file.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR audiowaveform (5)

.SH AUTHOR

.UR chris@chrisneedham.com
Chris Needham
.UE
